[MUSIC]
In this lecture we'll talk about three
different ways in which you can draw
statistical inferences from your data.
We can see that there are three
main questions that you can
ask which are all related to
different statistical approaches.
So let's take a look at
each of these in-turn.
Now in statistics,
we'll see that there's basically one
truth that we all try to figure out.
But the paths toward this truth, there
are many different ways to try to do this.
One useful metaphor that I think can
help you think about these differences
is if we look at Hinduism.
The Karma yoga, the Jnana yoga,
and the Bhakti yoga.
Now if you see what the Hinduist
book [UNKNOWN says about this
there's basically a path of action, a path
of devotion and a path of knowledge.
And I think there's a nice relation
to make between these three paths and
three questions that you can
ask if you do statistics.
Now, Royall talks about these three
different questions that one might ask.
And he differentiates between what
should I do, what should I believe and
what's the relative evidence?
And we see that these are three
different statistical approaches
that we can use to draw
inferences from data.
The first is the path of action.
The path of action uses rules to
govern our behavior such that,
in the long run, we won't make
a fool out of ourselves too often.
Now this approach uses p-values and
alpha levels to either make a decision to
reject the null hypothesis, or to accept
the null hypothesis, or if you want
to remain in doubt about whether
the alternative hypothesis is true or not.
This is a rule to govern our
behavior in the long run.
It's important to keep in mind that
this doesn't tell you anything about one
single test that you're performing.
So any current test might
be either true or false.
We don't know but
what we know is that in the long run,
there's a certain percentage of
the time that will be correct.
So this is the main goal
of the path of action.
Making decisions about what you should do.
The path of knowledge, the second way,
focuses on likelihoods.
And it tries to answer the question
what the likelihood is
of different hypotheses given
the data that you have collected.
Let's take a look at the situation
where you flip a coin ten times.
This is an old Dutch
from when I was young.
And we see that there are six heads and
four tales.
So if you flip this, if you flip a coin
ten times and this is the data that you
have observed, you can ask yourself
the question, is this coin biased or not?
So what is the likelihood
that this is a fair where
every option comes up 50% of the time?
Or what's the likelihood
that this is a biased coin?
Now we can plot the likelihood function
given the data that we have observed.
Let's take a look at
the likelihood function.
So this curves tells us all
the likelihood of different
hypotheses given the data that we have.
Now we've observed six heads,
so you can see that this,
according to the likelihood function,
is the most likely possibility, but
we can also calculate
the likelihood ratio.
How much more likely is the data
that we have given a fair coin?
And we see that this is
not very impressive.
The likelihood ratio's supposed to be 1,
if there's no difference between different
hypothesis, and this is pretty close to 1.
Later on in the course, we'll talk about
how you can really calculate these things.
The last option is the path of belief.
Now we have flipped a coin ten times, and
we saw that it came up heads six times.
Now if you see this, do you really believe
that the coin in the long run will come up
heads 60% of the time?
Now that seems rather unlikely.
You have previous beliefs about coins, and
you have a very strong belief
that most coins are fair.
So in the long run you might say,
well, I've observed this.
This one time there were six heads, but
I don't really believe that this is what I
will see if I continue flipping the coin.
I think, still, that 50% probability
of heads is what's going to happen
if I do this over and over again.
So you see that in this case, the data
did not really change your prior beliefs.
And this path is known
as Bayesian statistics,
which allows you to express evidence
in terms of the degrees of belief.
So how much do you believe
in a certain hypothesis?
So these three different paths, the path
of action, the path of devotion, and
the path of knowledge.
We can sort of make a relationship to
Neyman-Pearson statistics, which is
the path of action using alpha levels to
decide between the null hypothesis and
the alternate hypothesis.
Bayesian statistics, where we talk about
the degree of belief in hypothesis.
And likelihoods which tell us something
about relative evidence between different
hypothesis.
Now, in the history of statistics, we see
that there's a lot of discussion going on
between different sides in this debate.
And if you want to know how nasty science
can get, then I invite you to take a look
at the discussion in the scientific
literature between this person on
the left, Jerzey Neyman, and
the person on the right, Ronald Fisher.
Now, Jerzey Neyman is
about the path of action.
And Ronald Fisher uses p-values
in a slightly different way.
P-values as a measure of evidence.
Now, Ronald Fisher is a genius, one of
the few geniuses that we have in science.
He's not only a godfather of statistics,
he worked a lot on introducing
analysis of variance, for example.
But he's also a very respected
scholar in the field of biology,
where he did groundbreaking work as well.
So this is no doubt a very smart
individual, but there's a lot of debate
about the way that he uses p-values
to draw inferences from your data.
So if there's a discussion between these
two individuals, you can say, well,
the Neyman-Pierson approach to inference
is definitely the best way, the most
coherent way, to draw inferences from
data using alpha levels and the p-value.
So Neyman would be really happy,
say, haha, after all these years and
this intense discussion that we had,
I've won.
My way of doing statistics is
the only logical approach to draw
statistical inferences.
On the other hand,
Fisher might not be too sad.
He might say, forget it.
No one knows who you are,
which is in general true.
I think not a lot of people have heard of
the Neyman-Pearson approach of statistics.
And he would be pretty happy
that everybody uses p-values in,
well, arguably, not the optimal way,
but at least the way that he proposed.
And, well,
he gets a lot of respect for this.
You might not know this, but
the F-distribution, the F-value
that you calculate in an ANOVA, is
actually named after Fisher in his honor.
All right, so
these two sides are debating, but
now we see that Bayesian statistics
is on the rise in recent years.
This is Reverend Thomas Bayes,
or actually probably not.
This is a picture that's
circulating that might be him, but
it's doubtful that it's actually him.
Nevertheless, we'll use it in this course
to illustrate the Bayesian perspective.
And he would say,
gentleman, Quit fighting.
Who cares about these frequentist
approaches to statistics that you
think are important.
Because everybody in the future will
use Bayesian statistics anyway.
We can see whether that's true or not.
And maybe Neyman would respond, well,
I don't have a really high prior
that this is really going to happen.
Which of course, is a sly joke,
because he's using prior information
to draw an inference in this case.
And you see that when there's a discussion
between Bayesian statistics and
frequentist statistics, all of sudden, of
course, these two become perfect friends.
They say, of course, very good joke.
And they will be in agreement
about the way to do statistics.
Now the third approach is
the likelihood approach.
It's not very popular at the moment, but
likelihoods underlay Bayesian statistics.
And the difference between likelihoods and
Bayesian statistics,
is that likelihoods do use the relative
evidence that's present in the data,
as Bayesian statisticians do.
But it doesn't rely on
this subjective prior.
One of the proponents of this
approach is Rich Royall.
And he might say something that nobody
really cares about your subjective opinion
when you draw inferences from data.
So you should ignore this subjective
prior and only rely on the likelihood.
To which Thomas Bayes might say,
come on, don't be such a nuisance.
Nobody even knows what
likelihood paradigm is.
At this moment this might be true but
we'll see you can use it for
certain useful things later
on in these lectures.
Now, it's very important to
realize that in this debate,
which sometimes feels a little
bit like Microsoft versus Apple,
there's always this
clash between two sides.
And people will start to argue vehemently
between these two different approaches.
For you, it's very important that you
can use whatever answers your question.
And that's really the main point.
It's not either, or.
You can even combine these
approaches if you want to.
So the important take-home message here is
that there are three different approaches
in how you can draw
inferences from your data.
These all answer a question
you might be interested in.
And the main thing is that you
realize that there are all
these different approaches, so
you can ask the question that will
give you the answer that you want.
[MUSIC]